## 12.2. Other Compiler Optimizations: Loop Unrolling and Function Inlining

The loop-invariant code motion optimization described in the previous section was a simple change that resulted in a massive reduction in execution time. However, such optimizations are situationally dependent, and may not always result in improvements to performance. In most cases, loop-invariant code motion is taken care of by the compiler.

Code today is more often read than it is written. In most cases, fractional performance gains are not worth the hit to code readability. In general, a programmer should let the compiler optimize whenever possible. In this section, we cover some optimization techniques that were previously manually implemented by programmers but are today commonly implemented by compilers.

There are several sources online that advocate for the manual implementation of the techniques we describe in the following sections. However, we encourage readers to check whether their compilers support the following optimizations before attempting to manually implement them in their code. All the optimizations described in this section are implemented in GCC, but may not be available in older compilers.

### [](https://diveintosystems.org/book/C12-CodeOpt/loops_functions.html#_function_inlining)12.2.1. Function Inlining

One optimization step that compilers attempt to perform is **function inlining**, which replaces calls to a function with the body of the function. For example, in the `main` function, a compiler inlining the `allocateArray` function will replace the call to `allocateArray` with a direct call to `malloc`:

Table 1. Example of compiler inlining the `allocateArray` function.
|Original Version|Version with `allocateArray` in-lined|
|---|---|
|```c<br>int main(int argc, char **argv) {<br>    // omitted for brevity<br>    // some variables shortened for space considerations<br>    int lim = strtol(argv[1], NULL, 10);<br><br>    // allocation of array<br>    int *a = allocateArray(lim);<br><br>    // generates sequence of primes<br>    int len = genPrimeSequence(a, lim);<br><br>    return 0;<br>}<br>```|```c<br>int main(int argc, char **argv) {<br>    // omitted for brevity<br>    // some variables shortened for space considerations<br>    int lim = strtol(argv[1], NULL, 10);<br><br>    // allocation of array (in-lined)<br>    int *a = malloc(lim * sizeof(int));<br><br>    // generates sequence of primes<br>    int len = genPrimeSequence(a, lim);<br><br>    return 0;<br>}<br>```|

Inlining functions can result in some runtime savings for a program. Recall that every time a program calls a function, many instructions associated with function creation and destruction are necessarily generated. Inlining functions enables the compiler to eliminate these excessive calls, and makes it easier for the compiler to identify other potential improvements, including constant propagation, constant folding, and dead code elimination. In the case of the `optExample` program, inlining likely allows the compiler to replace the call to `sqrt` with the `fsqrt` instruction, and subsequently move it outside the loop.

The `-finline-functions` flag suggests to GCC that functions should be inlined. This optimization is turned on at level 3. Even though `-finline-functions` can be used independently of the `-O3` flag, it is a _suggestion_ to the compiler to look for functions to inline. Likewise, the `static inline` keyword can be used to suggest to the compiler that a particular function should be inlined. Keep in mind that the compiler will not inline all functions, and that function inlining is not guaranteed to make code faster.

Programmers should generally avoid inlining functions manually. Inlining functions carries a high risk of significantly reducing the readability of code, increasing the likelihood of errors, and making it harder to update and maintain functions. For example, trying to inline the `isPrime` function in the `getNextPrime` function will greatly reduce the readability of `getNextPrime`.

### [](https://diveintosystems.org/book/C12-CodeOpt/loops_functions.html#_loop_unrolling)12.2.2. Loop Unrolling

The last compiler optimization strategy we discuss in this section is loop unrolling. Let’s revisit the `isPrime` function:

```c
// helper function: checks to see if a number is prime
int isPrime(int x) {
    int i;
    int max = sqrt(x) + 1;

    // no prime number is less than 2
    for (i = 2; i < max; i++) {
        // if the number is divisible by i
        if (x % i == 0) {
            return 0; // it's not prime
        }
    }
    return 1; // otherwise it is
}
```

The `for` loop executes a total of `max` times, where `max` is one more than the square root of integer `x`. At the assembly level, every execution of the loop checks to see whether `i` is less than `max`. If so, the instruction pointer jumps to the body of the loop, which computes the modulo operation. If the modulo operation results in 0, the program immediately exits the loop and returns 0. Otherwise, the loop continues execution. While branch predictors are fairly good at predicting what a conditional expression evaluates to (especially inside loops), wrong guesses can result in a hit to performance, due to disruptions in the instruction pipeline.

**Loop unrolling** is an optimization that compilers perform to reduce the impact of wrong guesses. In loop unrolling, the goal is to reduce the number of iterations of a loop by a factor of _n_ by increasing the workload that each iteration performs by a factor of _n_. When a loop is unrolled by a factor of 2, the number of iterations in the loop is cut by _half_, whereas the amount work performed per iteration is _doubled_.

Let’s manually apply 2-factor loop unrolling to our `isPrime` function (available in [optExample3.c](https://diveintosystems.org/book/C12-CodeOpt/_attachments/optExample3.c)):

```c
// helper function: checks to see if a number is prime
int isPrime(int x) {
    int i;
    int max = sqrt(x)+1;

    // no prime number is less than 2
    for (i = 2; i < max; i+=2) {
        // if the number is divisible by i or i+1
        if ( (x % i == 0) || (x % (i+1) == 0) ) {
            return 0; // it's not prime
        }
    }
    return 1; // otherwise it is
}
```

Notice that even though we have halved the number of iterations that the `for` loop takes, each iteration of the loop now performs two modulo checks, doubling the amount of work per iteration. Recompiling and rerunning the program results in marginally improved times (see [Table 2](https://diveintosystems.org/book/C12-CodeOpt/loops_functions.html#NextTimes)). The readability of the code is also reduced. A better way to utilize loop unrolling is to invoke the `-funroll-loops` compiler optimization flag, which tells the compiler to unroll loops whose iterations can be determined at compile time. The `-funroll-all-loops` compiler flag is a more aggressive option that unrolls all loops whether or not the compiler is certain of the number of iterations. [Table 2](https://diveintosystems.org/book/C12-CodeOpt/loops_functions.html#NextTimes) shows the runtimes of the manual 2-factor loop unrolling (available in `optExample3.c`) compared to adding the `-funroll-loops` and `-funroll-all-loops` compiler optimization flags to the previous program ([optExample2.c](https://diveintosystems.org/book/C12-CodeOpt/_attachments/optExample2.c)).

Table 2. Time in Seconds to Produce 5,000,000 Prime Numbers
|Version|Unoptimized|`-O1`|`-O2`|`-O3`|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Original ([optExample.c](https://diveintosystems.org/book/C12-CodeOpt/_attachments/optExample.c))|3.86|2.32|2.14|2.15|
|With loop-invariant code motion ([optExample2.c](https://diveintosystems.org/book/C12-CodeOpt/_attachments/optExample2.c))|1.83|1.63|1.71|1.63|
|With manual 2-factor loop unrolling ([optExample3.c](https://diveintosystems.org/book/C12-CodeOpt/_attachments/optExample3.c))|1.65|1.53|1.45|1.45|
|With `-funroll-loops` ([optExample2.c](https://diveintosystems.org/book/C12-CodeOpt/_attachments/optExample2.c))|1.82|1.48|1.46|1.46|
|With `-funroll-all-loops` ([optExample2.c](https://diveintosystems.org/book/C12-CodeOpt/_attachments/optExample2.c))|1.81|1.47|1.47|1.46|

While manual loop unrolling does result in some performance improvement, the compiler’s built-in loop unrolling flags when combined with the other optimization flags yield comparable performance. If a programmer wants to incorporate loop unrolling optimizations into their code, they should default to using the appropriate compiler flags, and _not_ manually unroll loops themselves.