## 14.9. Exercises

### Exercises for 14.2 Hello Threading!

1. Implement the entirety of the scalar_multiply program. Time your code using the `gettimeofday()` function and 100 millions elements. How does the time of the program vary as you increase the number of threads? What if you increase the number of elements to 1 billion? 2 billion?
    
2. Improve the original `scalar multiply` threaded function by placing all the arguments into a `struct` and passing it through main. Time the performance of this version of the code. Is there any difference? [(solution)](https://diveintosystems.org/book/C14-SharedMemory/_attachments/scalar2.c)
    
3. Improve the `scalar_multiply` threaded function by implementing a better load balancing procedure. In other words, implement the load balancing procedure in the note above.
    
4. Using what you have learned, try implementing a program that performs matrix vector multiplication. In matrix vector multiplication, each row in the matrix is multiplied by some vector of elements.
    

### Exercises for 14.3 Synchronization

1. Implement a parallel version of the Step 2 of the CountSort algorithm. Time your performance.
    
2. Try combining Step 1 and Step 2 of the CountSort program into a single program. To do this, you will need to add another cycle of `pthread_create()` and `pthread_join()` to your program.
    
3. Time the total performance of the new CountSort program.
    

### Exercises for 14.7 OpenMP

1. OpenMP: The `writeElems()` function makes the assumption that the user only inputs a number of threads less that `MAX`. Is there a way to rewrite this code so that it will work, regardless of the number of threads?