## 17.10. Timing

Often users want to collect timing information about their programs. For example, a user may want to measure whether a change to a program improves its performance. The `time` command is one way to collect timing information about a process. It takes a command line argument that is the executable command line of the program or command to time, and it outputs timing information of the execution of the program or command. Here is an example of timing a run of the program executable `gol` that takes two command line arguments (`oscillator_500_500.txt` and `0`):

$ time ./gol oscillator_500_500.txt 0
real	0m3.814s
user	0m3.725s
sys	0m0.016s

The timing output is given as three different time values: `real` is the total execution time, sometimes referred to as wall time because it corresponds to the time from start to completion as if one was measuring runtime with a clock; `user` is the portion of total time that the process spent executing in user-mode; and `sys` is the portion of time that the process spent executing is system-mode (see [Chapter 13: The Operating System](https://diveintosystems.org/book/C13-OS/index.html#_the_operating_system) for more information about user and system mode). Note that the `user` time plus the `sys` time do not add up to `real` time. This is because during part of a processes total execution time it is blocked waiting for certain events like I/O or waiting for its turn to be scheduled by the OS to run on a CPU core. When a process is blocked, it does not accumulate `user` or `sys` time, but it does accumulate `real` time.

In this example, the timed `gol` process spends most of its time running on a CPU core (its `user + sys` time is almost all of its `real` time). For applications that do a lot of I/O, their `user + sys` time may be much less than their `real` time.

Often, the `-p` option is used with the `time` command. It displays the timing output in a format that is compliant with a POSIX standard, so that every system displays the timing results in the same format when `time` is run with `-p`. This is particularly helpful for writing programs that do post-processing `time` output (e.g., computing the average over a set of timed program runs) that will work identically across systems.

### [](https://diveintosystems.org/book/Appendix2/timing.html#_references)17.10.1. References

For more information see:

- The man page for `time`: `man 1 time`
    
- [most used Unix commands](https://www.cheat-sheets.org/project/tldr/command/special-most-used-linux-commands/) from cheat-sheets.org
    
- [Bash Reference Manual](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/manual/html_node/index.html) from gnu.org.