## 17.13. Pipes

Pipes allow a user to link together a sequence of commands in a single command line. A **pipe (|)** redirects the stdout of the command listed before the pipe (`|`) to the stdin of the command listed after the pipe:

$ cmd1 | cmd2            # cmd1's stdout is cmd2's stdin

$ cat quote
The function of education is to teach one
to think intensively and to think critically.
Intelligence plus character - that is the
goal of true education.

$ cat quote | grep th   # pipe stdout of cat into stdin of grep
                        # (find all lines containing "th")
to think intensively and to think critically.
Intelligence plus character - that is the

$ cat quote | wc        # pipe stdout of cat into stdin of wc
  4      26     160

$ ls
  another
  quote
$ ls | wc               # pipe ls output to wc
  2       2      14     # (number of lines, words, and chars in ls output)

Multiple pipes can be used in the same command line to chain together the stdout into the stdin of a sequence of commands:

cmd one | cmd two | ... | cmd n

Below is an example command line with two pipes. In this example, the stdout of `cat` is piped into the stdin of `grep th`, and the stdout of `grep th` is piped into the input of `wc`:

$ cat quote | grep th | wc   # number of lines, words, chars in the
  2      14      93          # lines of quote file that contain "th"

Here is the output from the first pipe in the command above, which shows the output of `grep th` that is piped into the stdin of `wc` in the second pipe:

$ cat quote | grep th
to think intensively and to think critically.
Intelligence plus character - that is the

Sometimes you may see the `xargs` command used in command lines with pipes. The `xargs <cmd>` command executes `cmd` on every value passed to it on stdin. We don’t cover `xargs` in detail, but instead illustrate what it does compared to the `ls | wc` example shown above.

The example below illustrates the difference between `wc` and `xargs wc` as the command after a pipe (`ls | wc` runs `wc` on the output of `ls` whereas `ls | xargs wc` runs `wc` on every file listed by `ls`):

$ ls
  another
  quote
$ ls | wc            # lines, words, chars in ls output
  2       2      14

$ ls | xargs wc      # lines, words, chars in each file listed by ls
  9  53 327 another
  4  26 160 quote
 13  79 487 total

### [](https://diveintosystems.org/book/Appendix2/pipe.html#_references)17.13.1. References

For more information see:

- [Pipelines](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/manual/html_node/Pipelines.html) from the [Bash Reference Manual](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/manual/html_node/index.html) from gnu.org.
    
- [most used Unix commands](https://www.cheat-sheets.org/project/tldr/command/special-most-used-linux-commands/) from cheat-sheets.org