## 17.6. Searching: grep and find

A common task is to search for specific files or for specific content within files. The `find` command is useful for finding a file or directory whose name has a specific pattern, whereas the `grep` command is useful for searching for a specific pattern within a file or set of files.

### [](https://diveintosystems.org/book/Appendix2/grep.html#_the_find_command)17.6.1. The find Command

The `find` command performs a recursive search of a filesystem (at a given start point in the directory structure), to find any files. When run with the `-name <search pattern>` command line option, `find` searches for all files (and directories) with a name matching the given search pattern. The search pattern is a regular expression that includes character literals and special characters or sub-patterns that specify general patterns. One special character commonly used in regular expressions is `*`. It means "match with one or more of any character". So for the search pattern `"hello*"`, `hello1`, `hellothere`, and `hello_123_XYZ` all match the pattern. Here are a few examples of the `find` command to find files:

$ find ./ -name dog.c    # from current directory (./) find all files named dog.c
$ find ./ -name "*.c"    # from ./ find all files that end with .c
$ find ./ -name "temp*"  # from ./ find all files that that start with temp

There are many other command line options to the `find` command, allowing users to configure its search behavior in different ways. See its man page for more information.

### [](https://diveintosystems.org/book/Appendix2/grep.html#_the_grep_command)17.6.2. The grep Command

The `grep` command finds patterns within a file or within a set of files. It can filter data from a source to a destination based on pattern matching. The `grep` command takes two command line arguments, a search pattern regular expression, and a file (or set of files) to search in for matching patterns. It outputs every line in the file (or set of files) that has a matching occurrence of the pattern. Like `find`, `grep` also has many command line options to tailor its search. Below are a few examples of the `grep` command to find patterns in a file(s). One of the files used in these examples is the `temp` file, whose contents are the following:

hello
1
hello there
2
hello goodbye hello
3
there hello
4
hello there

- Search for all occurrences of `"hello"` in the file `temp`:
    
    $ grep hello temp
    hello
    hello there
    hello goodbye hello
    there hello
    hello there
    
- Search for occurrences of `"hello there"` in the file `temp`. In this example, because the search pattern has space characters in it, the pattern needs to be inside double quotes.
    
    $ grep "hello there" temp
    hello there
    hello there
    
- Include the file line numbers with matches (`-n` command line option):
    
    $ grep -n "hello there" temp
    3:hello there
    9:hello there
    
- Search for all patterns that start with any upper-case alphabetic character (`[A-Z]`) followed by an `o` followed by one or more characters `*`:
    
    $ grep "[A-Z]o*" temp
    
- Search for all patterns that start with any lower-case alphabetic character (`[a-z]`) followed by an `o` followed by one or more characters `*`:
    
    $  grep "[a-z]o*" temp
    hello
    hello there
    hello goodbye hello
    there hello
    hello there
    
- Search for `main` in all files ending in `.c`:
    
    $ grep main *.c
    function.c:int main(void) {
    hello.c:int main(void) {
    string.c:int main(void) {
    structfunc.c:int main(void) {
    types_scanf.c:int main(void) {
    
- Search for `main` in all files ending in `.c`, and list the filename and the line number of all matches:
    
    $ grep -H -n main *.c
    function.c:21:int main(void) {
    hello.c:13:int main(void) {
    string.c:11:int main(void) {
    structfunc.c:17:int main(void) {
    types_scanf.c:13:int main(void) {
    
- Recursively grep (`-r`) for hello in all files starting in the `CS31` subdirectory:
    
    $ grep -r hello  ~/cs31
    

There are many command line options to `grep` to configure its search in different ways.

### [](https://diveintosystems.org/book/Appendix2/grep.html#_references)17.6.3. References

For more information see:

- The man pages for these commands (e.g., `man grep`)
    
- [grep user info](https://www.gnu.org/savannah-checkouts/gnu/grep/manual/grep.html) from gnu.org
    
- [most used Unix commands](https://www.cheat-sheets.org/project/tldr/command/special-most-used-linux-commands/) from cheat-sheets.org
    
- [Bash Reference Manual](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/manual/html_node/index.html) from gnu.org.