## 17.7. Viewing and Changing File Permissions

Every Unix file (and directory) is governed by a set of permissions, which defines its access rights. The permissions associated with a file are:

- `r`: read access to the file or directory
    
- `w`: write access to the file or directory
    
- `x`: execute access to the file or directory (for a directory, this means you can `cd` into it, for a file it means you can execute it at the command line (e.g., `./filename`). The compiler automatically sets the target executable file with `x` permission for the owner.
    

Each file’s permissions also specifies three sets of users: the file user/owner (`u`); users in the same group as the file’s group (`g`); and other (`o`) or everybody else. By changing the file permissions with a file, you can protect or share files in different ways these different sets of users. For example, file permission can be set to give the owner read and write access, users in the file’s group read access, and everybody else no read or write access.

To list file permissions with files and directories use the `-l` command line option of `ls`:

```sh
$ls -l
drwx------ 3 sam users 4096 Mar 26 12:49 classes/
drwx------ 2 sam users 4096 Mar 26 12:54 letters/
-rw-r----- 1 sam pals    78 Mar 26 12:51 notes
drwx------ 2 sam users 4096 Mar 26 12:48 projects/
```

The output from `ls -l` is in the following format (showing the listing of `notes` as an example):

type   permissions  links  owner  group  size  modification date   name
       u   g   o
 -    rw- r-- ---    1     sam    pals   78    Mar 26 12:51       notes
 d    rwx --- ---    3     sam    users 4096   Mar 26 12:49       classes/

The `type` is `d` for directories and `-` for regular files. The file permission listings are in three groups of `rwx` specifying permissions for the file user or owner (`u`), group (`g`), and others (`o`). For example, the `-rw-r-----` associated with the `notes` file means that the file owner `sam` has read and write access to the file (`rw-`), that the file’s group, `pals` has read permission only (`r--`), and others have no permissions to access the file (`---`). The other fields in the listing show the username of the file owner (`sam`), the name of the file’s group (`pals`), the size of the file in bytes (`78`), the last time the file was modified (`Mar 26 12:51`) and the name of the file (`notes`). Also listed are the number of hard links to the file (`1`), which is the number of names in the directory structure that refer to this same file.

The listing for `classes` is `drwx------`, which means that `classes` is a directory, the file owner `sam` has read, write, and execute permissions (`rwx`), and that the directory’s group (`users`) and others have no access permissions (`---`). In other words this is a private directory to the user `sam`; no one else can access this directory. We note that a directory must have execute (`x`) permission set in order to `cd` into it. Directories have link sizes greater than `1` because both the directory name (e.g., `classes`) and the name `./` in the directory (and the name `../` in any of its subdirectories) refer to the same directory. Because `classes` has one subdirectory, `CS31`, its link value is `3`.

### [](https://diveintosystems.org/book/Appendix2/chmod.html#_chmod)17.7.1. chmod

The `chmod` command changes the permissions on a file or directory. It takes command line arguments that specify how to change the permissions for the three sets of users associated with every file: user/owner, group, and other.

One way to run `chmod` is to give a three digit number as a command line argument that encodes how to set the permissions. The first digit specifies the permissions for the file user/owner, the second digit specifies the permissions for the file group, and the third for all other users. For example, `chmod 700 letters` makes `letters` a private directory; `7` sets the user’s permissions to `rwx`, and `0` set permissions to `---` for group and others.

To understand what the digits mean, consider each digit represented as a three bit binary number where a `1` means grant the permission and `0` means don’t grant it for the set `rwx`. [Table 1](https://diveintosystems.org/book/Appendix2/chmod.html#TabPermEncodings) shows some examples.

Table 1. chmod Permission Encoding Examples
|Digit|Binary|Permission|
|---|---|---|
|`7`|`111`|set rwx permissions|
|`5`|`101`|set r x permissions only|
|`4`|`100`|set r permission only|
|`6`|`110`|set rw permissions only|
|`0`|`000`|clear all permissions…​no access|

For example, if `sam` wants to give read access to the `notes` file with all other users and give himself read and write access, he would run the following command:

```sh
$ chmod 644 notes
$ ls -l
drwx------ 3 sam users  4096 Mar 26 12:49 classes/
drwx------ 2 sam users  4096 Mar 26 12:54 letters/
-rw-r--r-- 1 sam pals     78 Mar 26 12:51 notes
drwx------ 2 sam users  4096 Mar 26 12:48 projects/
```

The `644` sets the permissions on `notes` to `-rw-r—​r--`: `6` gives the file’s owner `rw-` access; `4` gives the file’s group `r--` access; and `4` gives other `r--` access.

The `chmod` command can also use the `[u,g,o][+,-][permissions]` setting format too. For example, if `sam` wants to give the `users` group write access to the `projects` directory, he can specify this permission using `g+w` (add write permission to group), and if he wants to remove read access from `notes` to others, he can specify `o-r` (remove read permission from all):

```sh
$ chmod g+w projects
$ chmod o-r notes
$ ls -l
drwx------ 3 sam users 4096 Mar 26 12:49 classes/
drwx------ 2 sam users 4096 Mar 26 12:54 letters/
-rw-r----- 1 sam pals    78 Mar 26 12:51 notes
drwx-w---- 2 sam users  4096 Mar 26 12:48 projects/
```

And when he realizes that giving the `users` group write access to his `projects` directory was a terrible idea, he can remove it using `g-w`:

```sh
$ chmod g-w projects
$ ls -l projects
drwx------ 2 sam users  4096 Mar 26 12:48 projects/
```

The `chmod` command has other command line options, including a recursive flag to recursively change permissions on a full subdirectory’s contents. See the man page for more details.

Linux also supports **access control lists** (ACLs), which allow a much richer set of permissions to be associated with files and directories. The man page for `getfacl` and `setfacl` contain information about ACLs, but the details are beyond the scope of our coverage.

### [](https://diveintosystems.org/book/Appendix2/chmod.html#_chgrp)17.7.2. chgrp

The `chgrp` command can be used to change the group associated with a file or directory. Unix groups typically need to be created by a system administrator who has root access on the system (the root user is the Unix superuser account that has access rights to the filesystem that a regular user does not have).

If the user `sam` is part of a group named `proj3` with two other users, `sam` can change the group and set permissions on their `projects` directory to give just this group elevated rights to the directory. For example:

```sh
$ chgrp proj3 projects  # change the projects directory's group to proj3
$ ls -l
drwx------ 3 sam users  4096 Mar 26 12:49 classes/
drwx------ 2 sam users  4096 Mar 26 12:54 letters/
-rw-r----- 1 sam pals     78 Mar 26 12:51 notes
drwx------ 2 sam proj3 4096 Mar 26 12:48 projects/

$ chmod 750 projects    # give proj3 group members r and x access to directory
$ ls -l
drwx------ 3 sam users  4096 Mar 26 12:49 classes/
drwx------ 2 sam users  4096 Mar 26 12:54 letters/
-rw-r----- 1 sam pals     78 Mar 26 12:51 notes
drwxr-x--- 2 sam proj3 4096 Mar 26 12:48 projects/
```

Similarly, the `chown` command changes the owner of a file, but you need to have root privileges to run it.

|   |   |
|---|---|
||File group setting and default permissions<br><br>Each user has default permissions and a default group that will automatically be associated with all new files and directories the user creates. Both of these can be modified in your shell’s config file (e.g., `.bashrc`). See [Section 17.14](https://diveintosystems.org/book/Appendix2/dotfiles.html#DotFiles) for more information about dot files.<br><br>Your default group is specified in the shell environment variable named `GROUP`. You can list its value using `echo $GROUP`:<br><br>```sh<br>$ echo $GROUP<br>GROUP=users<br>```<br><br>Your default file permission are configured from the `umask` setting in your `.bashrc` file. You can list its value using `umask`:<br><br>```sh<br>$ umask<br>77<br>```<br><br>A `umask` of `77` (or `077`) makes all my files and directories private (it sets the group and other permissions to 00 or `------`). You can think of the umask encoding as being sort of like the inverse of the chmod encoding (e.g., `7` removes all permissions (`rwx`) in `umask` but grants all in chmod).|

### [](https://diveintosystems.org/book/Appendix2/chmod.html#_references)17.7.3. References

For more information see:

- The man pages for these commands (e.g., `man chmod`)
    
- [most used Unix commands](https://www.cheat-sheets.org/project/tldr/command/special-most-used-linux-commands/) from cheat-sheets.org
    
- [Bash Reference Manual](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/manual/html_node/index.html) from gnu.org.