
### sysdig

https://github.com/draios/sysdig
https://sysdig.com/blog/hiding-linux-processes-for-fun-and-profit/

### haproxy 和我们的防御类似

https://www.haproxy.com/user-spotlight-series/from-1-5-into-the-future-how-haproxy-rose-from-a-simple-load-balancer-replacement-into-our-swiss-army-knife


We tried to get away from that and have something less disruptive and that’s where the HAProxy Enterprise edition Antibot module comes in and that’s the main reason why we decided to use the Enterprise edition in the first place. Basically, it is quite simple, actually. If a client requests your site, it doesn’t get the site, but on the first request it gets the JavaScript; It needs to execute the JavaScript, the JavaScript on the client sets a cookie and is redirected to the origin page. If the cookie is correct, it has to be verified by HAProxy, then it gets the original site. It works pretty well.

It was really easy to implement the different strategies for how to produce this challenge. Either it’s automated, you can even include Google CATPCHAs, a wide variety of things that you can do, and it looks like this. Sorry. I had to blind the secrets, but essentially all the logic to decide if such a challenge is produced in the first place, is contained in a Lua script. I decided to go Lua there. Most probably you could do most of the things in the configuration itself, but it’s pretty nice to have it contained in a Lua script, then you can code different triggers and stuff. We came up with this.

Then that top secret rules are checking if the cookie is correct and long story short, the user gets a challenge if the Lua script disagrees or the cookie was bad, and that’s it and it works pretty nicely. There are some caveats, some quirks that you have to take care about. For instance, this is very bad for Ajax requests because if you’re doing an Ajax request and you get a JavaScript challenge, it’s usually not solved. You have to take care of not messing up your application.